Hey, Pat.
>> Hey, Michael.
How are you doing?
>> Doing well.
Hello, everyone out in the live stream.
If you're here live, super happy to have you here.
Put some comments into the live chat, and we'll try to make it a part of your show.
If you're listening later, thanks for watching and being here on YouTube.
And with that said, I think it's time for us to kick it off.
Pat, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
>> Thank you.
I'm so honored to be here.
Longtime listener.
to be here. Long time listener.
Oh, that's fantastic. I really, really
appreciate that. It's
an honor to have you here. We're talking
about one of these subjects
that I really enjoy. I feel like it's one
of these
more evergreen type of topics. You know,
it's super fun to talk about
the new features in Flask 2.0,
but that's only relevant for so long
and for so many people. But
writing software that's reliable, that can
can be changed over time, doing so in a Pythonic way,
that's good stuff to learn no matter
where you are in your career.
- Oh, I absolutely agree.
- Yeah, so you've written a book called "Robust Python"
which caught my interest.
I, as you can imagine, get a couple of books
and ideas sent to me periodically per day.
And so they don't usually appeal to me,
But this one really does for the reasons that I exactly stated in the opening and we're just going to sort of riff on
this more broad idea of
What is robust python? What is clean code?
Like how do you do this in python and make it maintainable for both you in the future and other people and so on
Yeah, sounds good. Yeah before we get to that though. Let's start with you. What's your story?
How do you get into programming in python?
So I got into programming like many males my age. I loved video games as a kid
And I was 12 or 13, and some ad in one of my video game
magazines caught my eye for a video game creator studio.
And it was this C++ engine, but it
provided easy ways to do sprites and animations and particle
effects.
And they gave you step-by-step instructions.
Here's how you build Pong.
Here's how you build Frogger.
And here are the assets.
I started riffing on it.
I really came to love it.
I then took a programming class in high school,
true basic, which I don't remember much of
other than I don't think I'd ever go back to it now.
But it interested me enough
that I decided to go into computer science, college.
I learned more about the video game industry,
especially some of the hours they work and said,
you know what, maybe the video game industry is not for me,
but I still loved programming at its heart.
So I continued on and just found a few jobs after college
and just went from there.
As far as Python went, so I worked in telecom for a little bit.
Okay.
And early 2010s, we had some test software.
It was all written in the TCL programming language.
And that is an interesting programming language.
As far as types go, everything's treated as a string.
And it led to some very unmaintainable code.
So a few sharp engineers and myself, we decided, you know, what would it look like if we wrote
this in Python?
And a whole test automation was born from there.
And we just went, wow, Python makes everything nicer.
Like this is so much pleasurable to work with.
And I've done like C++ and Java before then.
So Python was a breath of fresh air
and I just fell in love with the language.
- Yeah, those are both very syntax symbol heavy languages.
I've done a ton of C++.
I did professional C++ development for a while.
I have never done much Java, but yeah,
they're really interesting.
I remember when I came to Python, I came from C#,
but also from C++.
And just in my mind, those symbols,
all the parentheses on the if statements
and the semicolons at the end of the line
and all that business, it was just required.
That's just what languages needed to be.
And then they weren't there.
And I'm like, I just,
this I'm having a hard time with this, right?
And I thought it was weird,
but then when I went back just to work on like a project
that was still ongoing, it seemed more weird.
I'm like, wait a minute, my eye, you know,
like the wool's been taken off my eyes.
Like I know now these are not required
and still here I am continuing to write them.
And it just drove me crazy once I realized
I don't have to put these things here.
It's just this language that makes me.
And so, yeah, it was really nice.
- Yeah, yeah.
Python kind of captured that magic for me.
And it's funny 'cause going back to C++
every once in a while,
my C++ got a lot better because of Python.
You start focusing on the simple, that's nice.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
You're not trying to flex with your double pointers
and all that kind of stuff.
It's like, we don't need this.
Let's not do this, come on.
Very cool.
So how about now?
What are you doing?
- So right now I am a software engineer at Canonical.
I'm on their public cloud team.
So we're building the Ubuntu operating system
for public clouds, AWS, Azure, GCE, a couple others.
And so we customize the images for clouds,
work with a lot of other Canonical teams
to make sure that their changes are reflected in our software.
And we maintain the CI/CD pipelines
to deliver those as often as we can.
Most of the tooling is written in Python,
so I get to use Python day to day, which makes me happy.
That's really cool.
What kind of features are we talking about here?
General hardware enablement.
So clouds may have new instances, new processor types,
working to make sure that that's enabled,
do a lot of close work with our kernel team.
Features that the cloud themselves might request, maybe--
- Like something the cloud needs to set up
and maintain the VM aspect?
- Yes, more on the infrastructure side,
maybe how do they hibernate their VMs?
How do they improve boot speed?
Those sort of changes.
Or how do they improve the security profile?
That's something I'm working on right now
with some of our clouds.
- Yeah, super, super important.
that's part of the promise to go into the cloud is often there's better security and better durability. But if it fails, it fails for
potentially all of some big chunk of it, right? Like that's the consequence of failure is also higher. So
yeah, yeah, the you have to be very aware of how many people are using your software when you deploy to the cloud.
Does it make you nervous to work on that kind of stuff?
Oh, absolutely. Yeah, yeah. I wouldn't I'd be lying if I said it didn't. But you, you learn to be careful, you learn to really
focus on making everyone, you know, having good communication between your teams, making
sure there's no surprises for anyone, that sort of thing.
Yeah, I remember that as well, just working on certain things like the first e-commerce
system I wrote, like this thing's going to be charging thousands of dollars per transaction
and I might screw this up and I'm really worried, deploying it for the whole company.
It was like big purchases people were doing.
It made me really nervous, but at the same time,
one of the things I've come to learn
over my career of programming is it's one of the things
that will really put a sad look on your face
is if you spend a lot of time and create beautiful software
and no one uses it.
- That's true.
- Yeah, so even though it may be stressful
that it's getting used a lot, it's really central.
That's also amazing, right?
- Yeah, but it's also made me a better programmer
'cause you just start thinking
about explicit error cases more.
At my last job, I mentioned I did telecom
and so 911 calls get routed through your equipment.
You don't wanna fail that.
And it is scary at first,
but you learn to develop disciplines over time of,
okay, how do we make sure
we're not making mistakes along the way?
- Yeah, absolutely.
And speaking of that,
I think that's maybe a good segue
into talk about this idea of robust Python.
- Yeah.
- First of all, let's just talk about your book
for just a minute,
and then we'll just get into the general idea of it.
What motivated you to write this book?
So I mentioned I've done C++ development in the past.
I started diving heavy into modern C++
and how it uses a lot more type safety features
than some earlier versions of C++.
Did a quick dabble into Haskell
just from a learning perspective
and really started to love static type systems.
But my day-to-day language was Python.
So I really, really dove deep on,
how do I make my Python safer moving forward?
So I pitched to a few publishers,
I want to write a book about type system best practices
in Python.
Let's talk type checkers,
let's talk about design types and so on and so forth.
O'Reilly, who published my book,
they bit and they said, "Oh, that sounds interesting.
"Can we expand the scope a little bit more?"
And I thought, okay, well, why do I write types in Python?
Why do I advocate type systems?
It's to make things more maintainable,
to make things live longer, to make things clearer.
And the idea of robust Python came out of that.
I think it's really a pretty interesting idea.
I do think when you come from these languages like C++ or Java or something,
there is something to be said for it literally is verified to be clicked together,
just like a perfect jigsaw puzzle.
Yeah, it won't catch every error, but it can catch more errors.
And that's a good thing.
Yeah, I remember how excited I was when I got my first non-trivial C++ thing
to compile and I'm like, yes, I've done it.
Little did I know, like I was in for it.
I mean, it was out of compiler errors
and into like real errors at that point, right?
- Yeah, the fun errors, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
The why, what is it?
What is it?
Segfault, whatever.
I don't know.
We're gonna work on that.
So anyway, that was really interesting.
I do think that it's not required, right?
I do think that there's really interesting code being written in Python.
And you can see that how it's being adopted in all these ways.
The biggest maybe example I have in mind of these two things side by side is,
you know, YouTube versus Google Video and how Google Video was in Python
with 20 engineers, Google Video was 100 C++ engineers, and eventually Google
just said, "All right, we're going to put that project aside and buy YouTube
because they just keep outrunning us in features with Python."
- Yeah, I think that's the beauty of Python
is that you can build things fast,
you can see them working faster,
and you don't have to fight the compiler
as much of the way.
So it's almost like these two things are at odds
and I think the answer is just Python's gradual typing.
You just type as you need to.
You add typing where it makes sense.
And I won't be prescriptive and say
you need types everywhere,
but there's certain places where it makes a lot of sense
and can save you money and time.
- Yeah, I do find it pretty interesting
how they've implemented types in Python.
And to be clear, this idea of robust Python
that you're focused on, types is just one part of it,
but it sounds like it was the genesis of it.
- It was absolutely the genesis.
- Yeah, yeah.
So we have sort of two other realities
that we might look at.
We could look at C++ or C# or Java,
like they're all the same in that regard.
They're like static compiled languages.
And then we've got something that's much closer to Python
with TypeScript, where they said,
we have the same problem, we have JavaScript,
which is even less typed, 'cause the runtime types
are all just weird dictionary prototype things anyway.
And we wanna make that reliable for larger scale software
and integrations and stuff.
So we create TypeScript, but the real fork in the road,
I think, that was interesting is the TypeScript people said,
we're gonna apply the ideas of absolute strict typing.
Once you start down that path, it's all down that path.
And they have to match up.
Whereas in Python, it's like,
let's help you down this path,
but not give up the Zen of Python
where you can easily put things together
and you're not restricted by this type system.
But if you run the right tools,
be that PyCharm, VS Code, or mypy or something like that,
it'll be there to help you make it better in lots of ways.
I think that's a really creative and interesting aspect of it.
- Yeah, yeah, I absolutely agree with that.
A lot of things that I discussed throughout the book
is the idea that these are tools in your toolbox.
And so I talk about tests, I talk about API design,
I talk about extensibility, they're all tools
and they shouldn't be applied everywhere.
I really wanna start focusing on first principles.
why do we do the things we do in software engineering
and what are the most appropriate places for them?
- Yeah.
You had a really interesting quote in your book
about software engineering.
And I've always sort of struggled
to have this conversation with people like,
oh, are you a programmer?
Are you a coder?
Are you an engineer?
Like, where are you on that?
Like, is that even a meaningful distinction?
And to a large degree,
I've always felt like it was just sort of,
you know, whatever sort of culture you're in,
You know, if you're in a startup, it's one thing.
If you're in like a giant enterprise,
they may value a different title in a different way.
It's all kind of the same.
But you had this cool quote that said something like,
"Software engineering is programming integrated over time."
- Yes, and I wish I could claim credit for that,
but that actually came from Titus Winters of Google
in a C++ con or CPP con talk.
And it's just really resonated with me.
We program, but software engineering is the efforts
that programming over years or decades, your code will live
decades. The more valuable it is, the longer live it probably
will be. I've worked on code that's been 15 years old when I
started on it. And there's code that I wrote 12 years ago that's
still running operationally. And that that's scares me to some
degree. Because like, Oh, did I know what I was doing back then?
But it just reemphasize like why it's so important to think
towards the future of what your audience,
you're gonna have maintainers that come after you.
And do you want them to curse your name
or do you want them to be like,
oh, thank goodness, this person wrote something
that I can use, it's really easy.
And I always prefer the latter on that.
I also like to say--
- Yeah, and the nicer code that you write
and the more durable and long live code that you write,
the more it can continue to have a life
even after you've stepped away from the project, right?
It's like, this is thing is still working well.
We can keep growing it rather than it's turned into a complete pile of junk that
we've got to throw away and start over.
Right.
So that's, that's a goal that you might want.
And then also that long-term maintainer might be you.
Yep.
You might be working out five years from now and go, why did I
make the decisions that I did?
I don't remember this.
Maybe you've jumped to a different project and came back.
It absolutely can be you.
Yeah, it absolutely can.
So maybe let's talk about some of the core ideas
that you have about making software
maintainable, reliable.
One of the things you talk about is the separation of time
and how code has to communicate, or the artifacts
that we all produce around code has
to communicate with people, both maybe almost immediately.
Like I am working on this project
with a couple of other developers,
and we need to keep it going forward.
The other one is way down in the future,
someone comes back and they're like,
"Oh, I'm new here, the person who created it left."
Maybe talk about some of those ideas that you've covered.
- Yeah, and so it feels a little weird
'cause what we're talking about
is asynchronous communication.
And it's weird to talk about that on a Python podcast
and not talk about Async/Await.
- Yeah, exactly.
- But it's asynchronous communication in real life,
which I actually think is much harder.
You have to think about,
you're time traveling to some degree.
you have to think about the future
and you have to communicate to them.
You probably will never meet them.
You'll never talk to them.
The only thing that lives on are the artifacts you create.
So your code, your documentation, your commit messages,
that's what people in the future are gonna construct
this mental model of your work from.
They're gonna be doing archeology when things go wrong.
Why is this code the way it is?
Is it safe to change?
What were the original intentions?
And so the more you can embed that in the code you write
and the surrounding commit messages, documentation,
the more robust your code base is going to be,
the more you're communicating intent to the future.
- Yeah.
Well, I do believe that that's one of the things
that was so important for 2020, 2021, for all of us, right?
Like we didn't know how much we were gonna need it
because there's always been this kind of tension.
Well, there's the open source world
and these other projects,
and there's those weird remote teams,
But we come to our cubicles and we all sit down
and we have our stand up in the morning
and we write our software together.
And like that's, and we use, you know,
Perforce or something,
internal where we lock the file.
No one else can edit the file till I unlock the file, right?
Like there's these, these different ways.
And we've been moving more and more towards this sort of
everything, even if the person is right next to you,
the way we work is as if they were across the world.
- Yeah.
- And you know, it's been really, I guess,
lucky for us as an industry that that was mostly in place.
- Yes, absolutely. - And that actually became true.
- Yeah, and so I think you touched on an interesting point
of a lot of developers think,
oh, if we're close in space, we can collaborate.
You know, I don't have to worry about my remote teams
and I don't have to worry about, you know, someone global.
But by thinking of that, of your collaborators
in that terms, it sets you up to think
about the future as well.
'Cause you can be asynchronous in space
or asynchronous time.
- Right, right.
And basically the same tools are there to address it.
- The same strategies help with both.
- Yeah.
So one of the things that you talked about
was this principle of least surprise.
- Yeah.
- Tell us about that principle.
- Yeah, the principle of least surprise,
also known as the principle of least astonishment.
I feel like it's safe to say most developers
have gone through a code base
and been legitimately surprised.
And I went, that function does that?
Oh my goodness, I would never have thought that.
Once worked on a nasty bug
where the get event function was setting an event.
And I kept overlooking it because I'm like,
what's a get event?
It's just a getter, I can ignore this.
And like two days later-- - This will have
no side effect, this will be fine.
- Two days later, I'm like, let me go step through this.
And I was floored, I'm like,
of course this explains my bug.
So your goal when developing software
is you don't want to surprise your future readers.
And I think this is why people say avoid clever code,
favor clear code over clever code.
You don't want to surprise readers.
Many, many people may not be as well versed
in the language as you.
Maybe they're coming from a different language,
maybe from TypeScript to Python.
The more you rely on clever tricks or poor naming
or just the wrong patterns,
you're throwing people off their feet
and they need, there's an added cognitive burden
that they must then carry to understand what you've written.
- Right, one of the beautiful things
about different abstractions are, here's a function.
I read the function name, that's all I need to know.
Here's a class, I understand what the class does.
I don't need to go and look into the details.
And it lets you build these more larger building blocks
of conceptual models.
But if that's not true, right?
Like if a getter is a setter,
well then all of a sudden those things
are all out the window and that's bad.
Yeah, I mean, we work by building mental models, and you need trust to build those mental models.
And as soon as that trust is violated, you it just starts taking time to do everyday tasks.
You say I want to implement a single API endpoint. Well, if I have to go dig through 10 different
files, just to make sure I'm doing everything right, that's going to slow me down. And if I
can trust that my mental model is correct, and it's been shown to be correct time and time again,
I can put more faith in that code and I can feel safer to start changing that code.
Yeah, for sure.
Another thing that I really liked about some of your ideas was that you talked about people having good intentions,
even if they write bad code, like they're trying their best and they're, for the most part, I mean, there might be people who are just
lazy or whatever, but for the most part, like they tried to write this well, even if it came out bad, they probably tried to write it well.
And it just didn't turn out.
as good as they hoped.
Or even they wrote it well
and it's just changed over time and those
original assumptions got lost.
It made sense in the early days
and the assumptions or the context changed
and now it's no longer accurate.
Or it's inflexible
and it's really hard to use to extend to your current
use case. I see that all the time.
Yeah.
One of the ideas that I thought was
interesting is this idea of legacy
And I've always been kind of fascinated with
what does legacy code mean?
- Yeah.
- Because legacy code for one person could be COBOL.
Legacy code for another person could be Python 2.6.
That's pretty old.
It could even just be Python 3.6
that's been around for a while, right?
And there's different people who have different definitions.
Michael Feathers has a cool book called
"Working Effectively"
or "Effectively Working With Legacy Code,"
something like that.
That's an interesting book.
I believe it comes from maybe a slightly different time,
but still some of the ideas will make you think.
- And I was gonna quote that book actually,
'cause his is a legacy code base
is a code base that doesn't have tests.
And I used to think that for a long time.
And I love tests,
but I've come to evolve my understanding of legacy code.
And here's where the definition I've settled on.
Legacy code, a legacy code base is a code base
in which you can no longer communicate
to the original authors or maintainers.
So the length of time doesn't matter as much.
If you've lost contact from the original authors,
all you have is the code base
and the surrounding documentation
to understand why it's doing it as it does.
So that's become my favorite definition for legacy code.
- Yeah, I like that one too.
I don't really like the test one.
I see where it comes from,
but I feel like it's judging a world
from like too strict of a place, right?
because not every piece of code is written
in a way that it has to be absolutely correct.
- Yeah.
- Right, so I think this is also a good way
to sort of scope this conversation
because a lot of times people hear,
oh, I have to use protocols and I have to use mypy
and I have to use x, y, and z
and I have to do all these fancy things
'cause Pat and Michael said so 'cause they were awesome.
And it's a big hassle.
I don't think I need it,
but here I'm trying to be a good software developer, right?
So I'll give you an example.
Years ago, I switched all the talk Python stuff,
especially the Talk Python Training stuff
from relational databases and SQLAlchemy
over to MongoDB and Mongo engine.
And so I had to write a whole ton of code
that would take a couple of tables
and then put them into a structure
and then put them in Mongo.
And that was all fine and good.
But here's the thing, the moment that code ran successfully,
I never wanted to run it again.
It only had to run once.
It had to move the data one time.
When it was done, it was,
there was no scenario where I cared about its typing
or I cared about its continuous integrate.
It was, I could have deleted it.
I just kept it because, hey, source control.
But, you know, like there's these scenarios, right?
On the other hand, you talk about like,
if you're an online, you know, reservation system,
like the reservation booking engine,
that part needs an entirely different bit of attention
and mindset than my little migration script, right?
- Yeah, and what I see is
what value are the things delivering?
Some things have one-off value and that's perfectly okay.
You know, your migration script, it's served its value,
but there won't be much value derived from it in the future.
Maybe from an archeology standpoint,
how did I go do this?
- Yes, exactly, maybe.
- But it's served its purpose.
With something that's core to a business,
a reservation booking engine, it delivers value when you've built it, but you want it
to keep delivering value throughout its lifetime.
And furthermore, the people who are working on it want to deliver value just as fast as
you did in the beginning.
So you don't want to slow down the future.
You start getting into where you get product managers saying, "Why is this taking so long?
This is super easy.
Why do you have to spend three weeks just adding this one little field?"
And the answer is often, "Oh, you know, we didn't think about how to enable value faster
when we built it."
And there's a tricky line there because you can't just gold plate everything and say,
"I'm going to make everything super flexible."
That often has the reverse effect.
It makes things too flexible and that becomes unmaintainable.
But there's a fine line between saying, "Okay, I'm going to think for the future and deliver
value now."
- Yeah, if every dependency can be replaced and everything can be configured from a file,
settings file and like you never, you know, eventually that becomes a nightmare.
It sounds cool.
It's not cool.
I've watched on some of those.
Yeah.
It's just painful.
And so here's the advice I give to people who want to think about how to make
their code base more maintainable.
Target your moneymakers, the things that produce value, because those are the
things you want to protect and whatever value means to you target things with
high churn.
So you can look in your get history.
You can see what files change the most chances are those are the files that are
being read the most.
They're the files that people are working in the most.
Putting more safeguards in those files,
making them more extensible,
will pay off just because more people are using them.
Look for areas where you do large swaths of changes.
It's called shotgun surgery,
where if you want to add a single thing,
you have to touch 20 files.
The same 20 files keep getting changed
again and again in a grouping.
That tells you that, you know,
if I were someone coming in new to the project,
how do I know it's 20 and not 19 or 21?
- Yeah, those are the things that are super easy
to forget a case.
- Oh yeah.
- Like, oh, we added this feature
and every if statement had an else if
that covered the new thing,
except for that one where we did the auditing
or except for that one where we checked
if they were an admin.
Oh, that one.
Now everyone's an admin, whoops.
- Yep, and so that's the sort of places
where I think type hinting is
and other strategies are just super useful
because you can start encoding that,
those ideas of, I want to catch this
when I miss a case, you can start encoding that
into your checks, into linters, into type checkers,
static analysis, and so on and so forth,
which I think is important.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So I think people are pretty familiar
with the typing system these days.
I think it's really cool.
The new type system is coming along with more things
like 3.9 now lets you write lowercase set bracket integers
or whatever, rather than from typing import capital set,
and then you can say it in parallel, right?
That's really nice.
With the pipe union definition,
you can do like none pipe a thing instead of optional.
- Yeah.
- All of those are really nice and so on.
I suspect that a lot of people are using types
for their editor, but are not going any further than that
with anything like mypy or continuous integration
or any of those.
Do you want to maybe speak to like the use case of both of those?
Yeah, so the use of editors alone is valuable.
You get autocomplete.
I mean, it gets squiggly if you do it wrong.
Yeah, I mean, that's right.
Autocomplete alone is so good.
And I was just thinking when you were talking about that getter that was actually a setter,
there's a really good chance that whoever wrote that code knew that was bad.
And yet their tooling was such that it was so error prone for them to change the name
that they were willing to live with a getter that changed values.
Because they're like, I could break so much stuff in ways I don't understand
if I don't have a proper set of tools, like a proper editor that'll do
multi-file refactoring and continuous integration and all of those things, right?
And so this is sort of like in that vein of your tools now do more for you.
Yeah, and so if you take a look at how costly errors are,
an error at the customer is incredibly costly when you factor in support and testing and
field engineering, whatever you need to resolve that customer context,
not to mention loss of customer faith.
But it's expensive for tests in the later stages of QA
to catch an error too, because now our development hasn't been planning to go fix this test
or this code, we have to stop what we're doing and go back and fix this test that maybe worked on three weeks ago.
The best time to catch an error is immediately after you write it.
And that's where that tooling comes in with your editors.
As you're typing, if you can find an error, great.
You is the least amount of cost you could have spent.
And then the second least amount, in my opinion, is letting some sort of stack analysis tool catch it, something like mypy.
So using types, you can say,
"I want to encode some assumptions into my code base.
This value will never be none.
This value may be none.
This value will be an enter string or this string."
- If you're right that it's never none,
you never have to check it for none.
- Right. - But if you're wrong,
you always have to check it for none, right?
Which is it?
- Yeah, we don't want to do defensive programming
of checking is none on every single variable we create
in every function and location.
application, that would just, it wouldn't be fun.
But your alternative, if you don't have that tooling is,
"All right, does this function return none?
Let me go look at its source code.
Oh, it calls five other functions.
Let me go look at their source code.
Oh, this calls something to the database.
Is that a nullable field?"
Anytime you're making someone trawl through your code base to try to answer
a question of, "Can this value be none?"
You're wasting their time, and they're either going to delay
features that just adds up over time, or they're going to make some incorrect assumptions,
and that's going to cause mistakes, which will lead to time and waste of money.
Yeah. You've already talked about focusing your attention to put things like type annotations
on the parts that matter and not necessarily stress about the parts that don't, especially
for code that's being retrofitted. But even code, I think that's not right. Like the thing that logs,
you know, it's going to turn whatever to a string, and if it comes out as like,
you know, some object at some address, like we'll catch it later and figure it out. But it's the core thing that you want
that stuff to be right. But one of the things that can be challenging is
the
interest and the buy-in and the love for this idea
might not be uniform across your team.
No, no, you know, and I've seen the same thing for testing and I've seen the same thing for continuous integration.
Not necessarily the same person in the same thing, but you know, it's like
if there's a person on your team that just doesn't care
about the continuous integration
and turns off all the notifications
that the continuous integration fails,
and then they keep checking in stuff and failing the build,
you're like, not again, I gotta go fix this
'cause this person doesn't bother to check their thing.
It just gets super frustrated.
And I feel like probably typing
has a similar analogy to that.
- It does.
And that's why if you're in a legacy code base
or even a maintained code base
that doesn't have a whole lot of typing in it.
There's some alternatives you can have
just beyond being strategic where you pick.
There's some fantastic tooling like monkey type,
which can annotate your code base for you.
There's Google's type checker, PyType.
It can do type checking without type annotations.
And it does it with a little bit different philosophy
than mypy, which I think is kind of cool.
It tries to infer based on just the values
throughout your function bodies,
what the types should be without type annotations.
So there might be ways to get the benefits
without actually making the full commitment
to those type checkers for just type annotations in general.
There's also, I mean, tie real world value to it.
Look through your bug reports.
If you find out that, hey, you know,
we've had 12 dereferences of none in the past month.
- And it's cost us X amount of dollars
dollars, I can now go to someone and say, look, this is costing us real money and our
time. Sometimes data speaks volumes. If you're having a tough time convincing people, I often
say, find the data to back it up. Look through your bug reports and find out what would we
have caught? How much faster could we go? Do an informal survey around your developer
base. How much more confident do you feel working in your code? And use that data to
to decide yes, this is working or no,
we need to look at alternative strategies.
- How much autocomplete do you get?
- Yeah.
- I mean, that might be a winner, right?
I would for me actually.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So I do wanna move on to some other ideas
because it's not all about typing,
but I think typing unlocks a lot of these
sort of durability ideas that you're covering there.
So another one that you talked a lot about,
I think is really interesting in this context
has to do with collection types
and knowing the right data type.
- Yes.
- And that matters so much, right?
Like somebody might use a dictionary
where they should have used a set or something.
And you're like, well, you used a dictionary.
So you mean me to look this up by value?
Like, no, no, I just want to have one of everything.
Okay, but why did we use the dictionary?
But people, when they're new,
they don't necessarily know that.
They find the first thing that works.
like, oh, a dictionary worked for this.
We're using dictionaries.
But beyond that, it means something
for certain container types and other things, right?
- And I think if you look at the Zen of Python,
there should only be one way to do it.
Most people say, but there's multiple ways to do that.
Like I can use a dictionary, I can use a set,
I can use a list and just search for unique values.
- Encode it in a string and you can parse it every time.
- Yeah.
The choices you make, the abstractions you choose,
communicate a certain intent.
When you choose to use a set, that tells me I can iterate over it.
There won't be any duplicates.
And I won't be looking things up by key.
When I think of a dictionary, I think of a mapping from key to value.
The keys must be unique.
But if all I care about is the keys and no values,
like there's added cognitive dissonance of,
"Why do I have values for this dictionary?"
They're all secrets. It doesn't make sense.
Yeah, it goes back to the principle of Lisa Stachman.
You get surprised like, oh, this dictionary is being used as a set.
I get it now.
And if you're not addressing that as you find it, you're just kicking the can onto a future
maintainer who then has to add that to the 20 other things he's trying to keep track
of throughout their maintenance of the program.
You mentioned that one of my big pet peeves is -- so a dictionary, I say, is a mapping
from key to value.
That's typically a homogenous mapping.
Every key is the same type and every value is the same type.
But we really, really, really love dictionaries for things like JSON responses
or relationships of data.
And that can be so detrimental to maintainability of codebases
if you're not careful.
So the problem is, a type checker isn't the greatest at saying,
"Oh, this is a dict.
Some of the keys are strings, others are ints, others are decimals,
and the values are all over the type.
You can use a type stick to try to get around that.
But really what you're talking about is a relationship of data.
When you talk about dictionaries, you're getting into the,
well, if I see, let's say I'm code reviewing,
let me put this in concrete terms.
I'm code reviewing some code,
and I see someone accessing dictionary and the key is foo.
I have to go look at all of where that dictionary was created and modified
to make sure that foo is actually a valid field in that dictionary.
I have no guarantees just if I see dict in a type checker,
I'm sorry, a type annotation.
So again, it's that trawling through the code base,
and oh, this is actually coming from an API,
and now I have to go read the API,
and I can't effectively code review code
or maintain code if I'm just reading that through
without doing that every time to make sure something hasn't changed.
So in this case, I say use a data class.
you have explicit fields, you can lean on your tooling.
If you mess up the field,
you aren't expecting to see new fields get created
in probably 95, 99% of the time.
Or, and I'm like, I will prefer a data class to a dictionary
if I have heterogeneous data almost all the time.
- Yeah, and maybe get it back like a Flask API call,
just call JSON and then just jam that star star
of that thing into the data class, something like that.
- Yep, yep, and I know you've talked about
Pydantic on the show a lot.
I love Pydantic, just define a model,
let it parse that JSON response
and just build that data class for me.
Throw an error if it's invalid.
And I really like that model
of attacking programs like that.
- I love Pydantic.
I love how it tries to sort of be flexible.
It's like, if I think we can fix this,
if you had a thing that is a string,
but in the string, it really is parsable to a number.
And it's supposed to be a number.
I'll just go ahead and do that type conversion for you.
If not, I'll give you a decent error message.
It's really, really lovely.
- Yeah, so if I'm working with APIs,
I love Pydantic for that reason that you just outlined,
but I'll often convert it to a data class
or a Pydantic data class so that I can say,
this is a relationship of data,
and I can kind of shape how a user uses
that relationship of data
throughout the lifetime of the code.
- Right.
- Yeah, it's an interesting tension
on how much those models get used
throughout all the tiers of your app
and how much you wanna keep them separate.
Have you seen SQL model, I believe it's called?
I just came out. - Oh, I have not.
I have not. - Okay, here we go.
You probably heard of FastAPI, right?
- Yeah, of course. - Obviously,
that's where Pydantic got, I think it's a big boost.
So Sebastian Ramirez came out a few days ago
with this thing called SQL model.
And already, I think it's less than a week old,
it has 4,000 GitHub stars, which is amazing.
But basically it's a merging of Pydantic and SQLAlchemy.
- Oh, fantastic.
- It has the SQLAlchemy unit of work model
and it underline has all the SQLAlchemy stuff,
but its models are actually Pydantic models.
- Yeah, and I think this is just another illustration
of why thinking about what types things are,
even if you're not doing type annotations,
why that's so important.
It goes back to how do we build mental models?
how do we build these abstractions in our brain
that we can rely upon as we work through our code base?
Yeah.
I do think this is interesting in that you could use the same model
at the data level, internal to your app,
and then you could even use it at API level.
But there's also people are saying, "But maybe that's not a good idea.
Maybe you want to separate those in interesting ways
for one can change and the other doesn't have to change."
But yeah, I see a lot of value to this thing.
It looks exciting.
And the answer to that is going to probably be it depends.
If your application needs them to be the same,
law of least surprise, make them the same.
If they have different reasons to change,
this is something I see a lot too.
We all get the dry principle,
don't repeat yourself,
ingrained in our head, and we think,
"Oh, if source code looks the same, we must deduplicate it."
But if that source code can change for different reasons,
you're going to add more headaches by deduplicating it.
because you're going to start adding special cases.
Well, this thing needs to change,
but the other thing doesn't.
How do I reconcile that? Special cases.
Soon you've become the very thing you've formed to destroy.
As you build that out, it's just littered with
special cases as you're trying to tie
together two things that have two separate contexts.
If you want to use something like SQL model for
a API level and your internal data model,
ask yourself, do these have different reasons for changing?
Maybe in the future, and like, a lot of this is just empathy for the future.
When I talk about maintainable code, robust code,
you have to have empathy for those future maintainers, put yourself in their shoes.
Are they going to want to migrate at some time?
And maybe change the API that they present to customers or users or other developers.
Do you want to change your database at the same time?
If so, keep them together.
if you want to keep that separate so that you have certain migration paths,
maybe you keep them separate. And so it's going to depend case by case.
But again, everything comes down to that those first principles of
what are you communicating with your intent when you make that decision in your code?
Yeah, well, and you're also like we've touched on, you're building different things at different times
under different constraints. Are you building Instagram's API,
which millions of people and apps are using?
Or are you building something really quick so you can get that app to work for marketing for the next thing for the week?
Right?
Yeah.
If it's that the second one, then you don't want to worry about too much abstraction.
And you just want to go like, I just need these to be in sync.
The data goes here, we're going to send over the API, we're going to be good, right?
This is going to fly.
On the other hand, if you're building something incredibly consumed and long lived,
then maybe you have different design patterns and care about it.
And I think it's important to think about organizational boundaries.
is the users, the consumers, the actors in your use cases,
is there an organizational boundary separating them?
In the Instagram case,
the people who are gonna be using my API,
I have no control over in my organization,
it's general public as far as I'm concerned.
If it's just someone on my team using it,
we can work through, okay, I'm changing this API,
let me help you through that.
But if it's someone outside your team
or outside your organization,
you're going to have a backwards compatibility to think about,
you're going to have all these vast amount of things that people are going to complain about.
And you need to think about that and say, okay, can I make these changes?
And is it good for my user base?
Even though I can't control them, the best I can do is entice them.
But you'll never be able to force someone to use something they don't want to
if you don't have that control over them.
That's why we have open source forks.
Yeah, absolutely.
So one of the ideas that I think comes up in this whole story,
and you talk a lot about like inheritance,
both inheritance in terms of class hierarchies
and even multiple inheritance, but also maybe
the more traditional interface style with protocols,
just so that you can express type stuff separately, right,
in interesting ways without coming up with inheritance
beasts and whatnot.
So one thing I did want to give people a quick shout out.
So we've all heard of solid principles, right?
And I've, I really enjoyed the solid principles
and I thought they were super interesting.
I still do.
I think they're pretty great.
I recently came across a presentation
and it was, I encountered over on Richard Campbell's show,
.NET Rocks, which I know people probably don't care
about .NET, but they actually talked
about this thing called Cupid,
which is an alternative to solid.
I might have to go check that out.
- And it was super, it has nothing to do with .NET.
It's just like software in general, patterns.
Like what do we know now, 20 years later,
that doesn't necessarily make so much sense for Solid.
And what is the alternative?
And he has this really cute name.
So as people are thinking about maybe those kind of levels,
like that's a pretty interesting thing to check out.
- Yeah, I like thinking of Solid,
again, going back to first principles,
there are things that I like about Solid.
There are things I also think get a bad rep because they're associated with heavy, heavy
OO code bases that have class hierarchies that are just unmanageable.
Probably multiple templates in there somehow as well.
Yeah.
And we've kind of grouped these things together.
So an example, like one of the most misunderstood ones in my opinion is the Lispkov substitution
principle of the solid principles.
And it applies when you're doing duck typing in Python, which has nothing to do with class
hierarchies, it doesn't have anything to do with, you know, interfaces or things
like that. It's a term about substitutability. And so when we talk
about duck typing in Python, it's, well, multiple types can represent some
behavior. Maybe they support an addition method and a subtraction method. Can they
be substituted into this function that's expecting addition and subtraction?
Right. When I do addition and subtraction on dates and times, another might do it
on, like, imaginary numbers. But the concept of adding and subtracting things,
- Yeah. - You can read that, right?
Something like that.
- Yeah, and so things like Liskov's Substitutability,
excuse me, Liskov's Substitutability Principle
starts with how do you think about substitutability
from your requirements and from your behaviors?
And you can get value from that
without ever touching a class.
So I think all too often we lump those solid principles
to a strict OO of the 90s or the noughts
and think that they aren't as useful.
I'm gonna have to check out Cupid
and see how that's changed as well.
I would expect that a lot of the same first principles are true,
but they've kind of reframed it in a way that is more applicable
to how we program today.
Yeah. I don't remember all the details exactly.
So, but yeah, something roughly along those lines.
I think that makes sense.
So, one thing I do also want to just sort of get your thoughts on
before we leave it completely in the dust.
You talked about a lot of times you've got a dictionary
and it's supposed to represent...
some stuff, maybe it's a response from an API where it says,
here was what you requested, here was the status code,
here's what the cloud cost of that is, and here's like the...
Something that looks like that,
maybe doesn't make sense as a dictionary, maybe gets moved into like a Pydantic model
or something like that.
But the other one is, I have 10,000 users,
and I want to put their email address as the key
and their user object as the value.
And given an email address, I want to know super fast
which user is that or do I have that user at all?
In that case, the dictionary makes a lot of sense.
Absolutely.
There's a super big difference to say the keys represent
like the same thing across different results,
whereas the same data structure,
a dictionary represents this heterogeneous,
like not really a class, but a class.
How do you position those so that beginners understand that
those are completely unrelated things
that need to be thought about separately,
but they kind of appear the same in code.
Because when I'm talking to people about dictionaries
and I'm teaching, they're like,
"Oh, well, why would you use a dictionary here?
Because over here you were doing it this other way,
but now it's like a database. Like, what are you doing with it?
This is weird. Why are these not... Why are they the same but different?"
So here's how I explain it.
So for the key mapping value,
I would say there's a few use cases you're going to have.
You're going to either be iterating over the dictionary
to do something on every element,
or you're going to be looking up a specific element
And that element that lookup is dynamic, you're typically passing in some value.
Maybe it's a variable that contains the email address in your example.
For something like an API response, something that might be more heterogeneous,
something that should be a data class or Pydantic model, what have you,
you typically aren't iterating over every key.
You're looking up specific keys,
but you're statically indexed, meaning you're passing in string literals between the square brackets.
This is the key I want in this circumstance,
the name, the age, the date of birth.
So you're looking at specific fields and you're building
a relationship between different key-value pairs.
A name, age, and date of birth is a relationship called person.
With your dictionary,
you're doing or with your mapping,
your key-value mapping,
there's no relationship between
email one to user object one and email two to user object two.
The relationship is just from key to value.
And that's typically what I explain to people trying to discern the difference.
That's a really interesting way to think about it.
Cause yeah, you will almost always use static literal strings when it's the
heterogeneous API response style.
And you will almost never do that.
Like, why would you say quote, type in the email address?
You would just have that object.
You wouldn't need to type in, like you would just never create that structure in
the first place, which I think is a really interesting.
So yeah, if you're dynamically passing in the keys,
it's probably all the same object,
but different ones of them as opposed to an API response.
- And I think that's the heart of why I really wanted
to write about robust Python.
So I've been programming for a while now,
and I make a lot of decisions as a senior engineer.
I really started to step back and ask myself,
why do I make these decisions?
Why do I choose a dictionary over a data class?
Why do I choose a class over a data class?
Why do I choose an acceptance test over a unit test?
Why do I choose to do a plug-in here,
but a dependency injection somewhere else?
And I just wanted to start documenting,
here's why I make the decisions I do.
Here's what intent I'm trying to communicate through
in the hopes that we start normalizing that conversation
more in our field.
Why are we doing the things we do?
Because as a beginner, it's frustrating.
Oh, you use a dictionary here, why?
You use a set here, why?
- How do you learn how to do that?
- Yeah, and so I wanted to really capture,
again, I've said it a lot, the first principle is,
why am I doing the things I'm doing?
What are the things I often give as advice
to junior programmers, intermediate programmers too,
and senior programmers?
It's just, it's, it's really,
it was really enlightening for me to really step back
and try to dissect why I do the things I do in Python
and come up with,
here are the valid engineering reasons behind it
and try to frame that in terms of maintainability.
Yeah, I think that's very valuable. I think it'll help people
learn because it's not enough to see it by example.
You're like, "Well, these both kind of work." It's like, yeah, but they mean
something different. They totally
communicate something different.
A couple of thoughts from the live stream I want to share.
Kim Van Wick out there says
fantastic advice
about having too much configurability.
Far too often I prematurely
dedupe two similar blocks of code
and then find myself adding special cases I wouldn't need.
Yeah, that sounds like what you're saying as well.
- Yeah, and so what I would say is that
there's a difference between policies and mechanisms.
The policies are your business logic
and the mechanisms are how you go do something.
Logging module in Python is fantastic for this.
You're logging, the logger module doesn't care
what you're logging, how you're logging it,
when you're logging it.
It's just the mechanism. - Database,
DevNull, who cares?
It's all the same.
- But the what you're logging is your policies.
And so very often I try to find a way to say,
okay, how do I make my mechanisms deduplicated?
'Cause those are what have reuse.
My business rules are gonna change,
they're gonna change for different reasons.
I wanna make that simple to define business rules,
but keep the mechanisms reusable.
You wanna be able to compose those mechanisms together.
- Yeah, that's a very interesting point.
Also on the live stream, Mr. Hypermagnetic says,
is it faster to look up a user or whatever
from a dictionary rather than iterate over a list.
And I think, boy, oh boy, if you've been down that path,
you know there's a difference.
- This is coming from an advice from a C++ programmer
who really cared about performance, measure it.
Use cases can be surprising.
If there are times where a contiguous block of memory
with a binary search is faster than a dictionary lookup,
but you will not know until you measure it.
There are also things that need to be fast in your program,
and there are many things that don't need to be fast in your program.
I think it's important being aware of which one those are.
You don't want to, not to sound clich,
the whole premature optimization is the root of all evil.
Breaking that down a bit, it's you don't want to just optimize everything
because it takes time to optimize things,
and it can obfuscate your code to optimize.
Why am I iterating over a list when a dictionary lookup can be just as useful?
If you measure the parts that need to be fast, and you say, "This is slow, and this way is faster,"
as long as you have a comment and a good commit message
that says why you're doing the slightly obfuscated way or breaking that law of least surprise,
as long as you have those breadcrumbs for someone to follow and go, "Oh, it's for speed.
This is the critical performance loop of my application.
Maybe it's the web request handler or something in a database engine."
You want to give those breadcrumbs so people can learn why you made the choices you did.
The last thing you want is someone in five years to say,
"Oh, they were iterating over lists because they don't know that a dictionary exists.
Let me go change that and slow down your app."
But without that measurement, without that data, it's a fruitless endeavor, in my opinion.
Yeah. I mean, for a lot of data in general, a dictionary lookup would be a lot faster.
But if what you have to do is every time create the dictionary,
and then do the lookup,
probably that act of creating the dictionary erases the speed up
because you would have just, you're kind of looping over anyway, right?
So it certainly depends, but yeah.
Yeah, don't take a website as prescriptive.
Measure, measure, measure, measure.
Yeah, absolutely.
And invoking just your command line application
with -mcprofile is super illuminating.
How long have I spent in a function?
How many times did I call this function?
Where's most of my execution time spending?
And it might be that the bottleneck you think you have
is somewhere else completely.
Well, yeah, that's actually a really important point as well.
If you do that C profile
and you find you're spending 5% of your time
in that part you're trying to optimize,
if you could make it go to zero,
it's still going to be 95% as fast.
Right?
So it might be able to be sped up significantly,
but it might not actually be germane to making your program feel any faster
because it's like optimizing nothing, basically.
And I don't want to misrepresent.
To go back to the question on the live stream,
typically a dictionary lookup will be faster than entering over a list.
I expect that most of the time.
I would not rely on that all of the time, which is why I advocate measuring.
Yeah, measuring, measuring, measuring.
I've definitely been in a place where I'm like,
"Oh, this 6,000 line super complicated thing
that is hard to understand and work on,
this is where it's slow."
And no, it was just some other like wrong data structure
and some other very simple part.
But if I didn't measure,
I would have gone and tried to rewrite the part
I was like barely understanding
and would have probably broken it
and still would have been slow.
- Yeah, I forget who mentioned it,
the order of writing things is you make it correct,
so that, and you have tests around it,
so that you know that it stays correct.
You then work on making it clear,
and then you make it fast if it needs to be.
And that last part is optional based on,
is this slowing, actually slowing me down?
Is there business value I'm losing because this is slow?
There's certain things I work with.
We're publishing something once a day.
If something takes another five minutes,
I don't really care.
Like my time is spent better on focusing on parallelization
or things of that nature.
And so it's just really understanding
why things are slowing down and where.
So there's a little bit of a tangent of robust Python,
but it's an interesting question to bring up nonetheless.
- You know, is that five minutes?
Are you waiting on that five minutes?
Or is that, you kick it off and you go, yeah, exactly.
Then you probably don't care at all.
But speaking of time,
I'm sure there are a ton of people listening
that are like, I would love to take some of these ideas,
maybe using mypy or putting more types
or looking at stuff like Pydantic
and so on.
But at the same time,
there's a lot of pressure on me to just,
from the time I receive the request to get some feature done
till the feature is done,
and the people making that request,
managers, business owners, clients, whatever,
they don't care that much about robust Python.
They want minimum input of money and time
for output of features.
But anyone who has done that for any extended period of time
knows that that is a net negative.
- Yes. - How do you address that?
I'll give you some thoughts of what I've done,
but how do you address that for people who...
- The way I... - Or is even that.
- I wanna frame the conversation for ourself.
It is your duty to deliver value as quickly as you can.
It is also your duty to make it so that your maintainers
can deliver value at the same speed.
So if you're delivering value today,
but hindering your ability to deliver a month,
three months from now, that's a problem.
Now I'm not saying jeopardize your MVP or go-to market,
but making sure that the business people understand,
I can do this, I'm not gonna be able to do this again.
The other part that I say that is just practice.
Practice with these sort of concepts
and apply them in small places.
You can do things incrementally.
Maybe there's a couple hundred lines of a library you have.
Just write type annotations for that
or make it more extensible.
Find small little wins here and there.
And as you keep working at it, just as Boy Scout rule,
leave the code base cleaner than you found it.
So if I'm going into something and say,
you know what, these assumptions don't hold up anymore.
I can't fix it all right now,
but I can do one incremental step
that makes it easier the next time I'm in here.
I take those little bites over time
and slowly morph into something that's like, okay,
as we start slowing down delivery,
I'm starting to make those improvements
and then we start speeding up back again.
Because there is a real tension between deliver it now
and making sure that you are going to be able to deliver
hastily in the future.
And by no means am I advocating gold plating where,
oh, make everything maintainable now.
'Cause there's typically a business behind this
and you don't want the business to fail.
you need to be able to be able to ship early and often.
And it's that often part that is often the tricky part.
Practice, practice, practice
and target where you're applying these ideas.
- You have tools to make it,
you don't have to put all that flexibility in there first.
You write it one way, you get it out,
but then you have refactoring tools,
you have continuous integration,
you have things that allow you to make those changes
long as you keep using them
and as long as the code doesn't get too bad.
And here's one of the things I've always liked seeing.
I forget who said this.
There's a great quote.
It's like, "To make a hard change,
first make the hard change easy."
That's the hard part.
And then go make the easy change.
- Yeah.
- When you see, like a lot of teams do some sort of
estimation of their stories, how big will this effort take?
If you see consistently high estimates,
and this is always a large,
we're always doing larges and extra larges.
Ask yourself, what would it take to make this a small?
Sometimes you use Fibonacci numbers,
like if this is an eight,
what would it take for me to make this a three?
And some of your listeners may be like,
what are you talking about?
But estimation, we're estimating effort.
- Yeah, traditionally way, way back in the day,
people used to estimate in hours.
How many hours is this gonna take you?
And it's like, that is a granularity that we don't have.
Like, I can't tell you, is it 17 or 18 hours?
I can tell you that two hours or two days, but I can't tell you 17 hours.
And so when you get large estimates again and again, ask yourself, are these estimates
because of necessary complexity, complexity that's inherent to my domain, or is it accidental
complexity that's built up over time?
I have to talk so necessary complexity is, you know, the deep workings of a neural net
or flight controller software, like these are inherently hard problems.
I can't make that simpler, not without making a whole lot of money revamping an industry.
But things like tax preparation, right?
Like there's a minimum set of complexity to just figure out what that answer is, because
the rules are complex.
But if let's take that tax, if I have to, you know, maybe add a new rule, and it's just
a simple multiplication somewhere, I shouldn't have to add 20 to 30 files of changes just
implement that one thing because it's going to happen again and again and again.
And so you look for these common cases, say, you know, we keep saying this is a
large effort, how do I make that smaller?
And then you say, Oh, you know, if we just restructured things here, you often find
that the same amount of effort to go make that heart change easy will pay off in one
to two cycles of like, okay, now that we're doing this again and again and again,
like, yes, I took an extra day longer or week longer.
And again, be mindful of your schedules.
I'm not saying split schedules intentionally,
but find that wiggle room where you can band together with your team
and find those areas, "Oh, this is a place that we can get some gains back."
I often like to set junior engineers on the team
at these sort of tasks.
They get more familiar with the code.
They often don't have as many responsibilities as a senior engineer.
And they just get that understanding.
And they feel like, "Oh, I've done something that really, really matters."
- I really need to make a change. - Right, so they're not on a cleanup job.
Yeah, and that has worked wonders for me as well.
Like it's just a win-win.
And then you're delivering those features,
those same things you're doing again and again
at a much greater speed.
And that saves you time to go do the next thing that you have to do.
Yeah.
My approach to this,
I mean, it only works with certain groups of stakeholders,
I suppose.
But when somebody would ask me, "How long does this feature take?"
It wasn't like, well, here's the essence of the feature.
Like it will work and you can click the button.
Here's how much it'll take to add error handling.
Here's how much it'll take to add logging.
Here's how much it'll add to make that work
in continuous integration and have tests.
And here's how much we got to do to like
not add technical debt while adding this feature, right?
Instead of presenting like, well, here's your menu.
Well, all I want is the feature.
Just give me the feature, right?
I just say, okay, well, if the feature is three hours,
the other two hours, like five hours, it's gonna take me five hours or whatever, like metric used
that that is what delivering it means in a professional setting is that it is done,
not that it's minimum path, zero errors and zero bad data will execute, right? They're not the same.
It's not to get sucked into the minimum. How quick can I do this? I bet I can do it an hour if I
I really fly, right?
- Yeah, and I think that's a trap we often fall into.
Like we're, as engineers, it's our responsibility
to provide accurate estimates
for what's best for the business.
And like, if you say, "Oh, I can do this without tests."
What you're really telling people are,
"I can do it, but I can't guarantee it will keep working
"after I deploy it, 'cause I will have no way of knowing."
I've removed that visibility of tests to tell me,
"Oh, this important thing that you really wanted now,
no idea if it's working now, sorry. And once you start framing it like that, people go,
"Okay, yeah, yeah, okay, let's see what we can do." And you might need to have some hard
conversations with the people who manage this. It might be, "We need more headcount. We don't need
as... We can't take as many projects. We can't take this much complexity. Maybe a worldwide
pandemic is happening and are, you know, we've been severely impacted. And I mean, you can't,
to some degree, you can't fix poor management of something, but you can coach your way up to
try to get out of that. Some people are very receptive to that. Some people are not. And in
the places that aren't, I mean, you have to ask yourself, is this something that I'm going to
live with? Or is this something that bothers me and I need to think about other things?
- Yeah, well, I think you're probably in a pretty good space
if you're making that clear to people.
So I think if you're proposing a feature
or how long will it take to do this feature,
then you just include what that means for a feature to be done.
It's not like zero bad data and it works sometimes.
It works for real.
The harder story is we've gotten into a bad place.
We need to not add features and just refactor improvement.
And that's a really tough one, because if I'm a business person, I'm never going to say yes, please stop feature delivery and making money for us
to go build the same thing we already have.
Like that's a tough sell to a business.
And I really think just an incremental approach.
And again, I mentioned earlier, targeting strategically.
What are your most used libraries or parts of code?
What are the areas with the highest bug count?
Put data to that.
Hey, what's the biggest bug?
the highest bug count, put data to that.
Hey, we've had five customer complaints
about a crash in their system.
They're linked to this one piece.
If we start doing this, we save X amount of money
and we would have kept that one customer.
That's the sort of thing that speaks
when you're getting against those
somewhat unrealistic business pressures.
You have to speak on their level.
And what I'm saying is a little wrong
'cause it's not an us versus them type mentality.
You're in this together.
They feel lost versus them at some times,
but you need to work together, make them understand
here are the business implications
of the choices we're making.
- Yeah, exactly.
I mean, you're the engineer and they're the business people,
but you've got to just put the situation
in terms that they appreciate
and they can decide if it makes sense for them.
- Yep.
- I would also add, people out there listening,
that if the answer is almost never,
can we clean up technical debt and make this better?
you probably will end up with a team over time
who is full of people who don't care about
raising technical debt and making it better.
And it's only just going to get worse and worse
in combinatorial ways.
It's not where the top engineers want to be.
And they don't get excited about coming to work
where they have to sneak in something that's unreliable
and cram new features in the broken, ugly code.
And something I've learned over a long time programming
is almost every technical solution,
there's a people or process problem at the root of it.
There's a lot of things that we think,
oh, code can solve this.
If I just refactor this, everything will be great.
But there's a people aspect of this.
And I'm not putting down those people.
Everyone around you is just a living, breathing human being.
They all have their own hopes, their own dreams,
their own obstacles, their own places in life.
And we have to recognize that sometimes.
Sometimes you have to work with the people
in order to solve that technical problem.
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
- So much for the mythos of the software engineer
in the basement by themself, huh?
- I think that stereotype is long dead for the most part.
- I agree, I agree.
All right, well, we go on and on,
but I think we're out of time.
So thanks for all your thoughts on this
and the book's interesting.
We'll talk more about it in a second,
but before we do, if you're gonna write some of this code,
work on some of these ideas,
what editor are you up to?
- Yeah, I use VS Code,
'cause I still jump between languages quite a bit,
and I like the flexibility of that.
For 1Z/2Z, I'll use Vim.
- Cool, then notable PyPI package?
- I'm gonna call it stevedore,
'cause it's a package used for plugins,
doing plugin development.
I think it's really neat how it uses
the package's entry points,
so that you can deploy plugins
as separate pip installable packages.
Just something I wish more people knew about.
- That's awesome.
One of the things we didn't cover,
but is also part of this robust story that you tell
is about extensibility, about plugins,
about all those kinds of things, right?
- Yeah, and that just goes back
to making the common cases simple.
If you're doing something again and again and again,
make it easy for people to do that.
And extensible code is a way to do that.
- Yeah, like that tax example, right?
If you could plug in the formulas
that are applied in this place,
and then you just add it in,
and maybe it just picks it up and goes,
- That would be ideal, yeah.
All right, awesome.
Good recommendation, one that I had not heard of.
All right, so people are interested in this idea.
I assume that they can check out your book,
maybe tell people about that real quick,
and then what else would you provide as resources
or places to get started?
- Yeah, I think just talking to senior members on your team,
talking to junior members on your team,
learning how people use the code around you,
keeping an ear for your stakeholders, your co-developers,
think about the code you write,
think about the implications it has,
I mean, just listen, most of this is empathy.
I thought I was writing a technical book,
I wrote a book about empathy instead,
and just didn't know it.
Put yourself in other people's shoes
and think about how they're gonna perceive your code
a month from now, a year from now, five years from now.
And again, just, I mean, a lot of talks that you'll see
at PyCon or the other Python conferences,
you'll see these nuggets of truth throughout them.
Ask yourself, why are they making the decisions they do?
And see if you can really understand
the kind of the root cause of why they're using this feature
especially as new features come out with Python.
- Yeah.
Well, a lot of great ideas in here
and I had a fun time talking about them.
- Oh, me too.
- Yeah, thanks for being here.
- Thank you so much.
- You're welcome, bye.
- Bye.
Bye everyone in the live stream.
Thanks for being here or thanks for watching.
[BLANK_AUDIO]